ChatBT starts out smart and then
somewhere around message 15 or 20, it
gets dumb. It forgets your instructions.
It contradicts itself and it even makes
stuff up. But here's what nobody tells
you. There's a pattern. The same thing
happens every time, right before your AI
falls apart. I'm going to show you the
warning signs to look for as well as the
four tactics that can stop this from
happening. Let's get into it. So, what
do I mean when I talk about the AI
getting dumber? Well, we can think about
it as a whiteboard. Imagine the AI's
memory, its brain, is the size of a
whiteboard. And every piece of
information we add to that whiteboard,
as it fills up, the AI gets dumber. So,
here we have maybe five messages going
back back and forth between you and the
AI. And 25% of that whiteboard is
filled. Now, when I say messages, it
includes what you give the AI, what the
AI gives back to you, any files you
attach to it, and also the AI's thinking
process. All of that is information
that's being added to this whiteboard.
And as the whiteboard gets fuller, so
say we get above the 25% mark, around
the 60% mark, the AI's intelligence is
still effective and it will still follow
your instructions, but it's slowly
starting to degrade. And once you get
past the 60% mark, and we're getting
around the 95% mark, the AI's ability to
be effective and follow your
instructions degrades rapidly. Now, the
size of this whiteboard and the AI's
ability to use information on it varies
by the model you're using. And most of
you are using likely one of three
options. Either you're using chatbt,
you're using claude, or you're using
Gemini. I'm also assuming that you're
using most of these tools in the UI
itself. And each of them have different
size memories, brains, andor in our
analogy, whiteboards. So either it's
going to have 60,000 tokens, 200,000
tokens, or a million tokens. So what is
a token? A token, simply put, is part of
a word. And a good equivalent to
understand how big these actually are is
60,000 tokens equates to around half of
a novel. Say 120 pages. 200,000 tokens
equates to around a novel and a half.
And then a million tokens equates to 7
to eight novels. And with chatbt, they
do say that they actually have a 400,000
token limit, which would be around 3ish
novels. But what you get access to
inside of the UI itself, that's going to
be around 60k. At least that's what
users say they're getting right now. So,
this is the size of the whiteboard.
Quick pause in your regular programming.
This video is brought to you by me as
always. So, two quick things. First off,
below is a 30-day AI insight series,
completely free. You'll get 30 insights
in your inbox so I can apply AI to your
business and your work. The second thing
is if you'd like to work with me, Blow a
series of offerings to see if there's a
good fit between the two of us, such as
a private AI community of business
owners and leaders or one-on-one
coaching. With that being said, let's
get back into the video. And again, the
goal of this entire thing is to utilize
as much intelligence as possible before
it starts to to degrade. And that's what
this chart represents. So here on the
vertical axis, we have the performance
of the AI. On the horizontal axis, we
have the context usage. So that's
basically the the brain space that's
getting filled up with the AI. And then
these lines here shows the intelligence
degrading over time. So if you do
nothing and you just use the AI as is,
the cut off point is going to be
probably around 50% of the AI's memory
space and the intelligence will start to
degrade after that point. So the AI gets
dumber. And if you use the tactics that
I'm going to walk you through today,
there's a chance that we can extend the
ability of that AI to follow your
instructions and keep the intelligence
over a longer period of time. And before
we actually start using those tactics,
we need to first understand the warning
signs of when we're approaching the
degradation of the AI's intelligence and
its ability to follow your instructions.
So there are a few different warning
signs you can see here that I'll walk
you through. We first have the
instructions getting ignored. The AI
contradicts itself. It starts to forget
facts you initially gave it. And then
also there's an automatic compaction
that occurs for different types of
models which I'll show you later. We'll
walk through each one of these. Now, the
first one here is when the instructions
start to fade in the AI's memory. And in
this case, you'll eventually have to
start repeating yourself over and over
to get it to follow those instructions.
As an example, say in this first message
you give to the AI, you say, "I'm going
to ask you a series of questions, and I
want you to respond in under 200 words,
so I don't have to read really long
responses." And this will work for one
back and forth, maybe five or 10 or 15
back and forth with the AI. Well, you
start to notice maybe around 16 or 20
messages, the AI is giving you back
600word essays instead of the maximum
count of 200 words. This is happening
because we've filled up the AI's memory
and it's forgotten the initial
instructions we gave it. That's the
first signal. The next signal is when
the AI contradicts itself. So maybe at
the beginning of a conversation, we've
asked the AI how to specifically
structure a presentation for a potential
client when we're presenting our
offering to them. and it initially
stated that we should lead with the ROI.
So, what's the return on investment for
the offering we're giving to this
potential client? But then we do a bunch
of back and forth with this AI having a
longunning conversation and we ask a
similar question or we have it summarize
the presentation and create the slides
for us and it comes back to us and says
it's actually important that we put the
ROI at the end of the presentation and
instead we build context first. Now, we
know because we just had the
conversation with the AI that this
actually contradicts what it initially
stated. And this again is a sign that
we've filled the AI's memory and it's
starting to get dumber in this case.
That's our second warning. Our third
warning is when facts start to
disappear. So, this is when you're
having a longunning conversation with an
AI and you give it a series of
statistics or facts to remember in the
beginning, but over time it starts to
either hallucinate those facts or
completely ignore them in in their
entirety. As an example, say we're
having a conversation with an AI about a
project and at the very beginning of the
conversation, we state that we want the
price we want to price this project at
$9,000. But near the end of the
conversation, when the AI is drafting
that proposal, it changes the price to
$6,500. If nothing happened in between
while it should change that price, it
likely what happened is it just forgot
the fact that you wanted to price it at
9K in the beginning. This is the third
warning sign. And the fourth one is very
explicit and obvious to see. So, if
you're using Claude specifically, it's
going to have an automatic compact
happen in the conversation. What do I
mean by compact? Well, what happens is
in the background, Claude is
automatically assessing how long the
conversation is. Once the conversation
gets to around 90% or 95%,
the AI is going to automatically
summarize this entire conversation. It's
going to insert a new AI in that same
thread. It's going to pass it that
summary and it's going to continue that
conversation with you. You'll know that
this is happening if you read inside the
section where the AI is thinking. It
says, "I'm organizing my thoughts or
it'll say I'm compacting the
conversation." It'll make it very clear.
Now, this can be useful for some people
that are using Claude. But the issue I
have with this is we have no say in
what's being summarized above. It could
be summarizing things generically and
the conversation gets worse as we go on.
But note, this is just for Claude today,
but I guarantee that Chatbutt and Gemini
will follow suit and add this feature as
well, where they have an automatic
summarization occurring once you get to
a certain part of filling up the AI's
memory. And that's our fourth warning
sign. Now, one tactic I want to share
with you before we actually get into the
ways that we can mitigate this is
knowing actually how many tokens you're
using. Sadly, all the tools that you use
today within the interface of the UI,
such as Chatbt, Claude, and Gemini, they
don't explicitly show you how much of
the memory is being filled. This feature
already does exist in coding tools,
which means I'm sure this will be ported
over to the UIs that we're all using
today eventually. But in the meantime,
what you can do, and this is something I
commonly do with my clients and myself,
is if I have a longunning conversation
or a large file, I'll upload it to
Google's AI Studio. Let me actually show
you what that looks like. Okay, so what
we have here is Google's AI Studio. So
all you have to do is go to a
studio.google.com.
You want to then click on the playground
here on the lefth hand side. And then
you'll see something like this. All you
need to do is drag and drop a file into
the chat box down here. Or you can
select the button here to upload the
file directly. I'll drag and drop a file
to show you the context window that's
being shown. So I drag and drop it here.
You can see that box pops up. Now this
file, what's going to happen is it's
loading the file into it. And you can
see immediately it shows me that this is
5,735 tokens. Now this is useful to know
because remember in the slide that I
showed you previously, we have a good
idea of how many tokens each AI can
take. So, if I know that I'm giving the
AI 5,000 tokens, any of these can handle
that easily. So, as a rule of thumb, I
recommend to use Google's AI Studio to
best understand how many tokens you're
using either in the entire conversation
you've had already. So, you can copy and
paste the entire conversation into AI
Studio to understand how many tokens
you've used so far and how much of the
memory of the AI you've already filled.
Or if you just have a large file like a
PDF or something else and you want to
see how big it is, you can drop that in
there to see how many tokens it is. So
that's just a a good little trick I
recommend everybody take advantage of
when trying to mitigate the AI getting
dumber too quickly. Now onto our four
primary tactics of how we can actually
extend the intelligence of these AIs. So
the first primary tactic is going to be
the handoff approach. So this is
basically taking the previous point that
I made around claude and how it does an
automatic summary. We're going to take
that idea we're going to apply to our
own situation so we can make very custom
tailored handoffs. And this is what the
flow looks like. So, say that you're
having a conversation with an AI over
here. And in that conversation, you
start to either see two things. One is
you've copy and pasted the entire
conversation into AI Studio and you
realize that we're getting around that
60% point and it's time to move on to a
new fresh conversation or you start to
see the AI's intelligence degrading and
getting dumber. Either way, we know it's
time to start a new conversation. So,
the first thing you do is you open up a
new tab inside of your browser and you
start a fresh conversation with a new
AI. You then go back to your other
conversation that's starting to degrade.
You want to ask the AI to summarize the
entire conversation answering these four
questions. What have we covered so far?
The most important points. What have we
what big decisions have we made
throughout this conversation? Where have
we left off based off of all the to-dos
we have here? So, we probably have done
some things. We still have a lot of
things left. I want you to let us know
where we are sitting in that to-do list.
And then finally, I want you to give a
very specific ask to the next AI on what
it needs to do next. By giving it this
ask either through a dictation or typing
it out, the AI will give you a very
specific tailored summary for the things
that you care about in that context.
You then copy and paste this summary
into that new chat that you created in
that new tab and you hit enter. That
next AI will pick up where the other AI
dropped off. So what we're doing here is
we're basically refreshing the AI's
memory and getting a fresh start with a
new AI and a new memory. And this is our
first tactic is the handoff process. The
next tactic is really understanding the
files that you're giving the AI. So some
files are bigger than others. And also
when you give a big file to an AI,
sometimes it doesn't necessarily need
that entire file. Maybe you can slice
off a certain part of it just for that
specific task you're giving to the AI.
So we want to be strategic with the
files that we choose. So first off, we
need to understand the nature and the
size of different files. So when you're
giving a word document, a text file, or
something else to the AI, these are
cheap because they're smaller. And it's
okay to assume that these these files
are smaller and they're not going to
fill the AI's memory so much. Next, we
have PDFs. So, this will depend on the
complexity of the PDF, meaning are there
a bunch of diagrams, images, and things
like that and or the size of the PDF. If
they're overly complex or overly large,
we can assume that this is going to fill
the AI's memory much faster. But if not,
then it's okay to drop those in. I would
say if the PDF itself is over 120 pages,
you probably want to drop an AI Studio
just to see how many tokens it takes.
But if it's anything below that, most
AIs can handle that pretty easily. Next
we have images. Now we can just assume
straight off that images are going to
fill up the memory faster just because
of the nature of the file. And after
that we have Excel sheets. Now this is
varied by the Excel sheet. So if it's a
really complex Excel sheet that has many
different tabs, many columns and rows,
AI tends to right now at least struggle
with being able to do complex
calculations and models on these
specific Excel sheets. So there's one
caveat here. If you have the Claude
plugin for Excel set up, it may be able
to do some more complex actions because
of how that's built. But that's only if
you have that plugin for Excel right
now. And then finally, we have video
files. So if you're dropping a video
into an AI, we can automatically assume
that's going to fill the AI's memory
very quickly. So if you have a video
that's longer than 2 to 5 minutes, it's
going to fill up the entire thing, and
you need to probably use Gemini since it
has the biggest memory right now. So
that's understanding the token cost or
how much memory we fill per file type.
Now, after we understand this, there's a
few things that we can do with the files
we're sharing with our AI. First, as I
mentioned, we can always just check how
many tokens this this file fills by
using Google's AI Studio. After that, I
recommend depending on the file and the
task you have at hand, instead of giving
the entire file to the AI, maybe you cut
it up into chunks and you only give the
AI what matters for that specific task.
And this is beneficial for two reasons.
One, we're not filling up the memory,
but also we're not distracting it with
irrelevant information. And then finally
is if you have a massive Excel file and
you want the AI to do something with
this, there's likely one tab in this
file that matters. As long as all the
tabs aren't interconnected in some
convoluted way, we can export that
specific tab as a CSV file and upload
that into the AI and it'll likely do
what you needed to do with that specific
tab. And those are the three tactics of
how you can kind of mitigate the file
type. Now, on to our third tactic, which
is experimentation. This is all around
building intuition, specifically
understanding how complex of a task AI
can deal with today. And the way that
we're going to do this is through the
learning cycle. So the first thing is
we're going to drop a task into AI. And
these tasks can be complex because we
want to push the capabilities of what AI
can do today. So we drop this in. We're
going to observe the results. One of two
things happen. Either the AI surprises
us and it achieves it flawlessly. So
that then updates our intuition of
understanding what AI can do today based
off the advancements these labs are
pushing. And the second thing is the AI
fails. If it fails, then what we need to
do next is we need to adjust adjust the
complexity of the task. So we need to
take that task we initially dropped in
there. We need to break it into smaller
tasks and have multiple AIs take on
different elements of that task. So
maybe we open up three tabs with chatbt
and we have one tab working on one part
of the task, the second tab on the
second part of the task and the third
tab on the third part of the task. And
running through this cycle, we're
building intuition of what's possible
with AI today. And we're going to then
update our understanding of the types of
tasks we can give off to AI right now.
Now that's our third tactic,
experimentation. Our fourth tactic is
strategic summaries. Now there's two
important caveats for this. So the first
caveat is this is mainly for people
using chatbt and Gemini. The second
caveat is this is for the people that
are unwilling to use the handoff
strategy. So if you for some reason feel
like you have to stay in the same
conversation thread and you're unwilling
to summarize it and go to a new
conversation, this tactic's for you. So
what we're going to do in this tactic is
we're going to do the same thing that
Claude does reactively. We're going to
do it proactively. So all these dots
represent an ongoing conversation with
AI. And what we're going to do is every
5 to 10 exchanges with the AI, we're
going to proactively ask the AI to
summarize what we've done so far and
then continue working in that
conversation. So if we decide to do this
every five exchanges, I'm probably
assuming that you're having really long
exchanges back and forth with the AI,
meaning you give it a file, it gives you
a long response, you give it a file, it
gives you a long response. we're filling
up the AI's memory much quicker, which
means we need to do this refresh sooner.
If we're doing it every 10 to 15
exchanges, that probably means that
you're having short back and forth with
the AI. Gives you a short question, you
give it a short answer. So, the AI's
memory is filling up slower. And it's
important to note when we do this
refresh here, we want to ask the AI the
same things we asked it in the handoff.
We need to ask, what are the primary
things we've achieved so far? What are
the key decisions we've made throughout
this conversation? Where are we leaving
off based off of all the to-dos we have
for this overall task? and what specific
steps are next after this. And then I
would also ask for it to make sure that
that summary is very brief because we
don't want to unnecessarily fill up the
memory with a bunch of jargon that's not
needed. Once we have this summary, we're
then going to ask the AI to continue the
conversation. We then do it again after
5 to 10 exchanges, maybe 15. Then we
keep doing this. And the reason we keep
doing this is we're going to extend the
runway. Without this tactic, the AI's
intelligence would drop off much faster.
With this tactic, we can extend its
intelligence. It'll eventually still
drop off, but we can extend its
intelligence over time. And again, this
is only for the people that insist that
they stay in the same thread. And those
are four tactics. So, as a quick recap,
the first one is the handoff summary.
So, summarizing that conversation,
opening up a new tab with a new AI with
a new memory and giving in that new
handoff summary. We're starting fresh.
The second one is strategic file choice
and parts of files. So, first we need to
understand which files are cheap and
which ones are expensive. And then we
need to know if the entire file is
needed or if we can cut off part of the
file and give it to the AI so we're not
filling its memory with irrelevant
information. Then we want to work on
experimentation so we can build our
intuition and our understanding of how
complex tasks AI can take on. And if the
task is too complex for the AI to do, we
want to break it up into subtasks and
have different AIs take it on in
different tabs. And then finally we have
strategic summaries. So this is for
people that are using chat and Gemini
and insist on using the same
conversation without starting a new one.
And that's when we can do we can extend
kind of that runway over time by having
the AI write brief summaries throughout
the overall thread to refresh its memory
on what it needs to refer to and
understand. And that's it. So, as a
reminder, two quick things. First off,
Blow is a 30-day AI insight series,
completely free. You'll get 30 insights
in your inbox so I can apply AI to your
business and your work. The second thing
is if you'd like to work with me, blow a
series of offerings to see if there's a
good fit between the two of us. Now, you
know how to stop AI from getting dumb.
But here's a much bigger problem. Your
smartest employee, everything that makes
them great is stuck in their head. And
if they leave, that knowledge leaves
with them. I made a video that shows you
how to pull all of that knowledge out of
their head and spread it across your
entire team using AI. It's right here.
So, go ahead and check out that video.
Click that video and I'll see you next
time,